CPM Specifications Document
Coronary Artery Bypass Grafting (CABG):
OSMSC 0109_0000

May 1, 2013
Version 1

Open Source Medical Software Corporation
© 2013 Open Source Medical Software Corporation. All Rights Reserved.

1. Clinical Significance & Condition
Coronary heart disease (CHD), also known as coronary artery disease is the leading cause of death in the U.S.,
causing about 25% of total deaths in the U.S [1, 2]. Coronary artery stenosis and occlusion is caused by plague
build up, often fatty materials resulting in atherosclerosis, in the arteries supplying blood to heart muscle
resulting in ischemia. Coronary artery bypass grafts are used to reroute blood to the heart when coronaries
have significant narrowing.

2. Clinical Data
Patient-specific volumetric image data was obtained to create physiological models and blood flow simulations.
Details of the imaging data used can be seen in Table 1. See Appendix 1 for details on image data orientation.
Table 1 – Patient-specific volumetric image data details (mm)

OSMSC ID

Modality

0109_0000

CT

Voxel Spacing
R
A
S
0.4883 0.4883
0.625

Voxel Dimensions
R
A
S
512 512 373

Physical Dimensions
R
A
S
250 250 233.13

Available patient-specific clinical data collected can be seen in Table 2.
Table 2 – Available patient-specific clinical data

OSMSC ID

Age

Gender

0109_0000

63

M

HR
(bmp)
61

3. Anatomic Model Description
Anatomic models were created using customized SimVascular software (Simtk.org) and the image data
described in Section 2. The models extend from ascending aorta to descending aorta before the phrenic artery,
including the coronaries and vessels off the aortic arch. . See Appendix 2 for a description of modeling methods.
See Error! Reference source not found. for a visual summary of the image data, paths, segmentations and solid
model constructed.
Table 3 – Visual summary of image data, paths, segmentations and solid model.

OSMSC ID

Image Data

Paths

© 2013 Open Source Medical Software Corporation. All Rights Reserved.

Paths and
Segmentations

Model

Page 2

ID:
OSMSC0109
subID: 0000
Age: 63
Gender: M

Details of anatomic models, such has number of outlets and model volume, can be seen in Table 4.
Table 4 – Anatomic Model details

OSMSC ID
0109_0000

Inlets
1

Outlets
15

Volume (cm3)
236.91

Surface Area (cm2)
460.12

Vessel Paths
18

2-D Segmentations
171

4. Physiological Model Description
In addition to the clinical data gathered for this model, several physiological assumptions were made in
preparation for running the simulation. See Appendix 3 for details.

5. Simulation Parameters & Details
No simulation results available.

6. Simulation Results
No simulation results available.

7. References
[1] American Heart Association, "Coronary Artery Disease -The ABCs of CAD," 14 February 2012. [Online].
Available: http://www.heart.org/HEARTORG/Conditions/More/MyHeartandStrokeNews/Coronary-ArteryDisease---The-ABCs-of-CAD_UCM_436416_Article.jsp#.T3yHFat8B8E. [Accessed 4 April 2012].
[2] Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, "Healthy, United States, 2010: With Special Feature of Death
and Dying," U.S Government Printing Office, Washington, DC, 2011.

© 2013 Open Source Medical Software Corporation. All Rights Reserved.

Page 3

Appendix
1. Image Data Orientation
The RAS coordinate system was assumed for the image data orientation. Voxel Spacing, voxel dimensions, and
physical dimensions are provided in the Right-Left (R), Anterior-Posterior (A), and Superior-Inferior (S) direction
in all specification documents unless otherwise specified.

2. Model Construction
All anatomic models were constructed in RAS Space. The models are generated by selecting centerline paths
along the vessels, creating 2D segmentations along each of these paths, and then lofting the segmentations
together to create a solid model. A separate solid model was created for each vessel and Boolean addition was
used to generate a single model representing the complete anatomic model. The vessel junctions were then
blended to create a smoothed model.

3. Physiological Assumptions
Newtonian fluid behavior is assumed with standard physiological properties. Blood viscosity and density are
given below in units used to input directly into the solver.
Blood Viscosity: 0.04 g/cm•s2
Blood Density: 1.06 g/cm3

4. Simulation Parameters
Conservation of mass and Navier-Stokes equations were solved using 3D finite element methods assuming rigid
and non-slip walls. All simulations were ran in cgs units and ran for several cardiac cycles to allow the flow rate
and pressure fields to stabilize.

5. Outlet Boundary Conditions
5.1 Resistance Methods
Resistances values can be applied to the outlets to direct flow and pressure gradients. Total
resistance for the model is calculated using relationships of the flow and pressure of the model.
Total resistance is than distributed amongst the outlets using an inverse relationship of outlet area
and the assumption that the outlets act in parallel.
5.2 Windkessel Model
In order to represent the effects of vessels distal to
the CFD model, a three-element Windkessel model
can be applied at each outlet. This model consists of
proximal resistance (Rp), capacitance (C), and distal
resistance (Rd) representing the resistance of the
proximal vessels, the capacitance of the proximal
vessels, and the resistance of the distal vessels
downstream of each outlet, respectively (Figure 1).

© 2013 Open Source Medical Software Corporation. All Rights Reserved.

Figure 1 - Windkessel model

Page 4

First, total arterial capacitance (TAC) was calculated using inflow and blood pressure. The TAC was
then distributed among the outlets based on the blood flow distributions. Next, total resistance (Rt)
was calculated for each outlet using mean blood pressure and PC-MRI or calculated target flow
(Rt=Pmean/Qdesired). Given that Rt=Rp+Rd, total resistance was distributed between Rp and Rd adjusting
the Rp to Rt ratio for each outlet.

© 2013 Open Source Medical Software Corporation. All Rights Reserved.

Page 5

